---
layout: post
title: The JAM Stack
date: "2018-08-23  07:40"
description: Musings around the JAM stack and best practices
category: blog
client: Self
published: false
---

The JAM stack is rather new to me despite having years of experience using Jekyll and Hexo. In fact, I had been following the [best practices <sub>[1]</sub>](https://jamstack.org/best-practices/){: target="_blank" } or close to them for the better part of a year. 


## What is JAM?

JAM is a

> "Modern web development architecture based on client-side JavaScript, reusable APIs, and prebuilt Markup." [<sub>[2]</sub>](https://jamstack.org/){:target="_blank"}
{: class="ml-4 pl-4" style="border-left: solid #e9ecef 5px"}

As you might have guessed, JAM is an acroynm standing for JavaScript, APIs, and Markup. This means sites built in Drupal or Ruby on Rails aren't JAM.

The benefits are outstanding! Top level performance, highly secure, cheap, scaleble, and most importantly, a much better developer experience. 

## My JAM Journey

Flashback to the start of this year. I took two bulky, poorly designed WordPress informational websites and converted them into Jekyll. These sites hadn't had content updates since the previous decade and I really didn't want to have that many moving parts for something this simple. The aestetics were no longer consistent with the brand so this gave me an opportunity to simplify, optimize, and polish for a higher teir user experience.

I started by building a sandbox site with a kitchen sick of components I knew I was going to use in the redesign. I published the theme gem and spun up two more sites. Dumped the WordPress exports in and voilà! Two beautiful sites! Well, at least once I got all the image references straightened out.

After that another WordPress site I run started having issues with PayPal, and then WooCommerce, and then SMTP, and issues kept getting racked up almost faster than I could clear them. The decision was made to utilize the Shopify platform.

I took the aforementioned theme and made it more versitile by giving it the ability to set the primary color scheme as variables. Then I built in some custom site structure and new layout types, designed funnels to the different products, and enriched the blogging experience. 

In addition to all that, the site was setup with various API integrations. The site uses a service called [Crisp](https://crisp.chat/en/){: target="_blank" } that lets users talk directly to customer services or professionals in the field. I took this integration and tied it into Slack as well as Github, Wrike, MailChimp, and a few others. To top it off I used Cloudflare as a CDN to further optimize the site.

This leads me into my most recent project. The stack I'm working in by this point is technically JAM however I didn't like the JavaScript/UX layer. I had just been using jQuery and a few other plugins up until this point, mostly to save time but also because I didn't particularly like what AngularJS had become and had been looking for an alternative.

I spoke to many of my contacts; friends working at Happy Cog, Dockyard, Penn State, Columbia University, and many online communities. I was recommended everything from Ember to Backbone to React. But the best recommendation came from a developer from Synapse Marketing. He recommended Vue.js. I had heard a little about it but no one I knew was really using it.

Luckily I found an online Vue.js 2 course that was heavily discounted. I picked it up and learned the development methodologies quickly. I also had a perfect use case for my first real build utilizing this library.

I had a [resources site](https://resources.solarinnovations.com/){: target="_blank" } that needed a higher degree of interactivity. THIS BLOG POST describes the build itself. 

From there I've been working on automating the build processes so non-technical users can modify content.






